agitation and stress were designed to
get us up and move us and when we try
and fight that too much and we try and
quiet that stress
that actually can be problematic you
have to decide are you going to try and
quiet stress or are you going to
actually lean into action
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr andrew huberman he's
a lab director and professor of
neuroscience at stanford university who
has won numerous awards for his work
including the pew biomedical scholar
award and the mcknight neuroscience
scholar award he also serves on the
editorial board of several prestigious
journals including current biology the
journal of comparative neurology cell
reports and many many others and welcome
to the show dr hubermann
thanks for for having me i'm delighted
to be here dude as i was saying before
we started rolling man the brain
neuroscience is my area of absolute
fascination this was the thing that
ended up taking me from
sliding towards depression feeling lost
feeling frustrated not knowing how to
make anything in my life this is in the
late 90s so people were
debating whether neuroplasticity was
real carol dweck had not written her
seminal book on growth mindset yet so i
had to cobble a lot of this stuff
together but then once i did it was
absolutely transformative for my life
i'm super interested in something you
said which is ultimately our thoughts or
a choice i'd love to start with that i'd
love to start with
your sort of i think really insightful
definition about what a growth mindset
really is
yeah well first of all carol is a
wonderful colleague and friend and so
we've been doing a bit of work on the
neuroscience of growth mindset among
other states of mind so
you know the study of neuroscience is
really about what the nervous system
does and
amazingly enough
the nervous system is responsible for
everything that happens to us from the
time that we're born until the time we
die
but that really boils down to only five
things
the nervous system
has the responsibility of sensation so
sensing the physical events in the
environment we have these so-called
receptors in the eyes and the ears and
the nose and the mouth on the skin
that take physical entities in the in
the universe that are real fixed
non-negotiable things like sound waves
and photons of light and chemicals in
the environment traveling that make it
into our nose and things like that and
convert those into the second thing
which is perceptions so the nervous
system's responsibility is to take those
sensations which are non-negotiable and
perceive certain ones and not others so
for instance right now until i say you
know what's the sensation of your feet
contacting the floor or the bottoms of
your shoes you weren't thinking about it
but those pressure receptors were being
engaged the entire time so your
perception
is like a window or a spotlight that's
very much linked to attention
then there are emotions often called
feelings
and those are really designed
to push us down particular avenues of
perception and
the next thing which are thoughts
okay so we've got sensation perception
feelings and then there are thoughts
which really have a lot to do with what
we're perceiving and the way we're
organizing those perceptions
what they mean and generally that's put
into the context of what we already know
or memories and then the fifth thing is
behaviors
or actions and of course neurons are
responsible for generating actions and
they're really two kinds of actions
there are the actions that you generate
reflexively like your breathing and your
heart rate right now are largely
reflexive or you could decide troll of
your respiration
and be make it voluntary right and not
just reflexive so those five things
sensations perceptions feelings thoughts
and actions really encompass all of our
life experience and that's from the very
mundane of getting up in the morning and
brushing your teeth to the most
awe-inspiring
goal motivated
uh pinnacle moments of your life the
nervous system not the immune system not
the digestive system all of which are
important but the nervous system meaning
the brain spinal cord and the
connections with the body and the
connections from the body back to the
brain and spinal cord are responsible
for all of that
and as a just a final point the nervous
system is also responsible for telling
the immune system something that's very
relevant right now in this covet
pandemic
when to be active you know we don't
often think about the immune system as
governed by anything but it's actually
governed by
the nervous system
yeah one thing that i find really
interesting is the way that the
and in fact it'll be interesting to hear
your take on this so i think of the
brain as basically creating a virtual
reality environment that we're um
engaging in now it's a very usable
virtual environment that i can walk
around without bumping into too much
[__] like you said i can translate um
you know the things that are floating
around in the air into a sense of smell
and i can navigate the world based on
what i see and hear and smell and taste
and all of that stuff but at the end of
the day it really is all happening
in this enclosed dark
skull and the brain itself doesn't ever
actually interact with light it doesn't
interact with sound waves it's all an
interpretation of that
which i find really interesting and i
find it really interesting the way that
that plays out into our lives how do you
think about that as somebody who
is is literally lifting a brain out of
somebody's i would assume deceased uh
head you know you have such a tactile um
relationship with the brain
yeah so you said something really
important which is that you know we're
essentially just this collection of
cells and yet
everything is organized in this almost
video game virtual reality like version
of the world so the way that
neuroscientists think about these sorts
of things nowadays is in the following
way
that you're absolutely right tom
everything about
life experience is an abstraction and
the brain has a language it's creating
an abstract representation of everything
that's out there in the world
everything
and that might seem sort of obvious to
some of your listeners but when you
think about it
that's perhaps one of the most
interesting and profound features of
life in general the galaxies any
organism
because somehow your abstractions and my
abstractions and the abstractions of the
brains of all your listeners are able to
converge on some common meaning at least
in many cases about what these words
mean or what
um different events in the natural world
mean now objects fall down they don't
generally fall up so there are some
rules that we learn very early on that
are obvious right but there are some
other rules that are less obvious that
come about when we start thinking about
things like growth mindset and what's
rewarding what is punishing what it
means to lean in hard to a problem or
what creativity is but i i want to just
mention there's one exception to all
this which is very interesting and it
happens to be the one that my lab works
on so i am biased in this regard but
there's one piece of your brain
that is outside your skull
in fact you have two
the rest of your central nervous system
is inside your skull and spinal cord
except lining the back of your eye is
the neural retina which is three cell
layers thick meaning it's about as thick
as a credit card
and the neural retina is not attached to
the brain it is brain
the cells in in the neural retina were
deliberately placed during development
they got pushed out of the skull and
deliberately to sense light events in
the environment and not just the shapes
of things and what's moving around out
there but fundamentally to tell the rest
of the brain and nervous system when to
be alert and when to be asleep based on
how much light is in the environment and
the quality of that light
so
viewing morning sunlight
around the time of sunrise as well as
evening sunlight around the time of
sunset not just at sunset rise and
sunset but near those times a couple
hours on either side
is fundamental for instructing the brain
a special collection of neurons right
above the roof of the mouth which then
instructs all the cells of the body when
to be active it's sort of like you're a
factory and you need your digestion to
work on a particular schedule and you
need your spleen to work on another
schedule and it's morning light and
evening light in particular and the
cells that do this
they pay attention not to blue light
everyone's kind of obsessed with blue
light as it relates to this stuff
wrong that's only half the equation it's
the it's the contrast between yellow
light and blue light so in the morning
and at sunset
yellows are getting brighter watch a
sunrise but sometime or sunset and blues
are getting darker and that contrast is
relayed to the brain you don't perceive
it even blind people can transmit this
information into the brain and it's and
it says
make a cortisol pulse early in the day
to give you active you know energy and
agitate your body to go be active
and then it times the onset of the
melatonin pulse in the evening which is
going to put you to sleep
and so when we think about the brain and
the nervous system being isolated it is
isolated but it's a as much as it's a
machine and a collection of cells they
need to work together and they need to
know when to be active and so it's
viewing of morning sunlight in
particular and evening sunlight in
particular that anchors everything that
goes on from the top of your skull to
the bottom of your feet in terms of this
basic thing of when to be alert and when
to be asleep and screens but not just
screens and not just blue light making
their way into the hours of say 11 p.m
to 4 a.m
do just the opposite
there was a paper published in cell a
very an excellent journal
showing that bright light activation
between
11 pm and 4 am
sends a signal from the eye to a brain
structure called the habenula the name
doesn't matter but it kicks off a
disappointment circuit it starts
suppressing dopamine and the habenula is
linked to the pancreas right the brain
body connection and starts dysregulating
blood sugar so the the keyboard is it
why does it trigger disappointment yeah
so this is very interesting so every
circuit in the brain has a push and a
pull so we have a reward system for
viewing light at the particular times of
day which are morning and evening and
during the day and avoiding bright
lights in the middle of the night but
there's a punishment signal literally
upon a chemical punishment signal
whereby dopamine which is this feel-good
molecule that's essential for things
like growth mindset and pursuit of goals
and
well-being of all sorts is suppressed
when human beings or animals view bright
light in the middle of this dark phase
of their circadian cycle which is
between 11 pm and 4 am approximately and
so nature does this it creates rewards
for doing the right things that move you
in the direction of general adaptation
and wellness and it punishes you mother
nature is kind of a double-edged sword
she's very benevolent when she wants to
be but if you don't obey her rules she
punishes you too and so you have
circuits in the brain that are
pro-depressive and this light viewing in
the from 10 pm to 4 a.m is a
kicks off a pro-depressive circuit
and they're really
i want to get into some of the other
things that are pro-depressive as well
but before we do that one one thing that
i really want to anchor us to is
what you were saying you're saying that
people have an oversimplified view of
what a growth mindset is you were just
talking about that relationship to
dopamine um give us your sort of brief
nutshell version of what a growth
mindset really is
yeah so carol and i have had a lot of
discussions about this idea of yet i'm
not there yet but that i can't get there
that's the whole principle behind growth
mindset however when you the the
discovery of growth mindset is worth
thinking about so carol's discovery was
these kids
that for whatever reason
you know
like doing math problems even though
they knew they couldn't get the answers
right these were sure fail problems so
it's the same kind of people that like
doing puzzles and these kids not
surprisingly go on to do phenomenally
well in a number of different areas of
academic pursuit
you know but what's interesting about
growth mindset is that it seems like
there's some attachment of the reward
systems of the brain to the
action or the pursuit of a goal not just
achieving a goal and when we step back
and we look at
what that really entails at a
neurochemical level we have reward
systems in the brain they generally fall
into two categories there are the reward
systems that make you feel really good
with kind of the here and now and
everything that's within the confines of
your skin and the things you already
have you know love of your dog love of
your spouse um gratitude for all the
things you happen to have and that and
those are generally governed by the
release of molecules like serotonin and
oxytocin okay
but then there's another reward system
which is the one that drove a lot of
human evolution which is the dopamine
reward system now dopamine is a
very misunderstood molecule it's often
talked about only in the context of
reward like i'm going to work to this
goal i'm going to build my company i'm
going to you know get 10 years or
profess whatever it is and you reach it
and you get this dopamine reward and
indeed that's true but what's often not
discussed is that dopamine is secreted
enroute to rewards while you pursue
rewards
now
the ability to tap into that system
to subjectively amplify that pathway of
reward in pursuit of goals is an
absolute game changer when it comes to
things like
anything challenging that of long
duration or uncertainty or getting
through this cove you know pandemic
situation
but the amazing thing is remember the
brain only does five things and we get
to decide which of those sensations and
perceptions have relevance and which
ones don't or which ones are attached to
a goal and which ones aren't so growth
mindset in its purest form is the
attachment of these reward systems to
the effort process to the friction
process and not just to obtaining a
reward and just as a kind of final point
to that there's a very um well-known
body of literature and neuroscience at
least among neuroscientists that talks
about something called reward prediction
error and it says if you can dose the
dopamine
subjectively as you go through the
pursuit of something and then have a lot
of dopamine when you reach that thing
it's very likely that you're going to
reinforce that circuit there will be
neural plasticity and that circuit will
become stronger so the next time you
will revisit those sets of behaviors the
opposite can happen too
where you're in real anticipation of
something this is gonna be great it's
gonna be great this can be great and
then you reach that goal and it's kind
of underwhelming and that generally
triggers this the circuit that i
referred to earlier this kind of
disappointment or the pro-depressive
circuit so dopamine
is involved in reward but it's also
involved in the pursuit of rewards and
so as you reach a milestone or as you
tell yourself i'm on the right track
this friction i'm feeling this late
night this early morning this hard
conversation with somebody that doesn't
feel good i'm going to tell myself this
is for a larger purpose that's that
subjective insertion that abstraction
that we're talking about earlier and
when you start releasing dopamine to
those kinds of things there's
essentially no limit on the number of
things you can do or the energy to do
them so just as a last last point about
dopamine when we're in effort we're
always secreting adrenaline we're always
in pursuit and it's draining it's tiring
dopamine has this beautiful capacity to
buffer adrenaline and you know this
you've experienced this before because
if you've ever been working really
really hard maybe your team has depleted
everything's just a mess and somebody
cracks a joke and all of a sudden in an
instant it's like everything's reframed
that couldn't have been hormonal
hormones work on that on the schedule of
like hours to days to weeks it had to be
neurochemical it absolutely had to be
neurochemical and that neurochemical is
dopamine dude what you just described is
literally the scientific breakdown of
how you turn your life around i would
just tell people that that subjective
insertion is one of the most powerful
concepts i have ever heard in
neuroscience you're the only one i've
ever heard articulate it that succinctly
now you talk a lot about meaning
walk me through like the how we assign
meeting how we leverage the reward and
punishment to to really
get us in a situation where we can push
through something other people might not
be able to push through yeah so when you
start thinking about things like growth
mindset in terms of how they convert to
neurochemical signatures it leads us to
this place of okay if it's all
subjective then you know if i just say
look i'm going to stand up out of my
chair and that's going to feel amazing
is that going to work well no it depends
on the meaning that i attach to
something and this and this subjective
part can be a little tricky and a little
bit hard for people so i want to try and
lay it out in a in a concrete way so
that if they want to apply this they can
um incidentally or not so incidentally i
should say when you look at communities
of very high performers and i'm
fortunate enough to do some consulting
with some people from special forces
communities and so forth they're very
good as are you at attaching a reward to
specific behaviors in subjective ways so
growth mindset and these dopamine
rewards that we subjectively apply are
not about
saying oh you know i had a terrible day
i performed poorly but you know what
it's great i just feel great anyway it's
not about that it's not about attaching
your sense of reward to the ultimate
goal
it's about attaching your sense of
reward to the fact that you're making
action steps that are generally in the
right direction the more you can reward
the effort process
the better off you are at building these
kinds of neural circuits and these kind
of tendencies to be able to lean into
anything challenging over essentially
any duration so how does this work like
how would somebody do this right well
keeping in mind that adrenaline and
epinephrine are all great for getting us
into action this is mother nature's way
of chemically making us feel kind of
agitated remember stress was designed to
agitate us to move us away from things
and toward things but realizing that
that's a
limited resource that eventually that
same chemical is what makes you
have a negative mindset it feels painful
it's the burn in your body it's
uncomfortable
and realizing that dopamine can push
back on that neurochemically it can
suppress those sensations of wanting to
quit you say well then how do i get this
dopamine to work for me before i hit a
goal because not every day is going to
be a real win there's some days i mean i
know from my science career there were
days that were really hard experiments
didn't work papers got rejected and yet
you know i've spent two decades or more
just drilling on and drilling on and
it's been a sheer pleasure at times but
there's been you know some pain points
along the way so what is this process
really about and how would somebody
implement these dopamine and epinephrine
type nor chemical events in their own
life well we all know the example of
like wanting to run a marathon i've
never run a marathon but
that'd be a nice goal to have let's say
tomorrow morning i set my shoes near the
door now a lot of people have talked
about this day one you set your shoes
near the door day two you go out the
door day three you run around the block
day four but the key thing is not just
to go through the actions but when you
hit each one of those self-designated
milestones the milestones that you're
setting out for yourself you have to
pause for a moment
and
tell yourself
i'm heading in the right direction i
haven't run the marathon yet but this is
the foundation upon which i'm going to
lay another foundation upon which i'm
going to lay another foundation and
those little pulses of dopamine allow
you to get that action step without the
depletion that it would normally bring
otherwise you're just like you're
spending money this is like replenishing
this bank account that you have and it's
a neural bank account and so dopamine is
the is the thing that you can control
the dosing of and so if you say
today it's my shoes at the door but
tomorrow it's around the block and
that's it but that's in the direction i
want to go
what you do is you now get those two
events plus the next day the mile long
runners and so forth without it
depleting you it actually builds this
capacity to build more reward and this
is what you've done this is what people
from elite special forces can do they
know how to make small
simple
physical steps in the real world
that allow them to build on these reward
circuitries but they don't get
delusional about how they're doing they
they know they keep the end in mind but
they get very micro they move the
horizon in very close and so
if you can move the horizon to something
you know you can complete and you reward
that
you essentially are where you were
before
you're just as strong if not stronger
but you're heading in the direction you
need to go you're not depleting you're
not spending out anything and it feels a
little weird because none of us like to
reward things that aren't external but
the ability to control these internal
reward schedules is everything one thing
that um you've talked about that i think
is uh
along these lines be interesting to see
if if they feel as related to you when
you know so much about it but for me at
a high level these feel very related
talked about somebody gets in a car
accident uh acetylcholine if i'm not
mistaken is released it says [__] pay
attention to this pay attention right
now and it it
basically responds to peaks and valleys
so something really bad happens or
something really good happens it's
present you begin to hardwire um the
association of whatever emotion is with
that thing and so
if you have something a traumatic event
or whatever and you now see something is
very negative you can actually flip that
by getting in a state where you're
secreting acetylcholine again and now in
a positive right so that you can feel
good about that thing
so how do people
take that take control of that process
so if you've been in a car accident and
you now have this negative association
with driving how do you grab a hold of
the production of acetylcholine how do
you yeah reframe yeah so it's great
you're mentioning acetylcholine so
acetylcholine is the neurochemical that
we want to think about any time we're
talking about neural plasticity and in
particular attention high attentional
states so everyone knows that the brain
is very plastic early in life so from
birth until about age 25 you can learn
so much for better or for worse i always
say the downside is that early in life
you're you have less control over your
life circumstances but your brain is
very plastic so there's a you know
darken light to that later in life you
have a lot more control generally over
your life circumstances but the brain
becomes less plastic however
we know based on nobel prize winning
work and
recent work in addition to that that the
neuromodulator acetylcholine is secreted
when we pay attention to something very
specific it acts as sort of a spotlight
in the brain making certain synapses the
connections between neurons more active
and more likely to be active again than
others so when you hear that song that
you love so much and it moves you and
you feel dopamine being pulsed into your
body that's a real thing you're actually
getting dopamine secretion you've formed
that deep association with that and
acetylcholine draws your attention to
that and that song is essentially wired
in a very indelible way into your
nervous system multiple you can probably
even with certain songs you can feel
your body start to energize because of
course the brain through connections
with your muscles controls your body so
for things that are traumatic or
negative what we're really talking about
is neuroplasticity that's focused on
unlearning and most of the therapies for
this whether or not it's emdr eye
movement desensitization reprocessing or
it's traditional psychoanalysis and
psychotherapy or it's somatic embodied
release
you know kundalini breathing type almost
all of those are designed to do
something which is to bring the person
or you bring yourself
into a state of heightened alertness
right you can't do this stuff when
you're sort of half asleep heightened
alertness and then focusing your
attention on the traumatic or negative
event this is the way that it works and
then pairing that with something new you
know traditionally this was done with
things like nlp or in talk therapy where
people would feel
the relation the positive relationship
with the therapist that was kind of the
main rationale
in association with this very traumatic
sometimes even you know shameful type
events and the idea is that you you
would simultaneously have those two
experiences the negative one and the
feeling of safety and you would rewire
those circuitries i actually believe
that can work but it can take a lot of
times it can take a lot of visits to the
therapist which is not to say it's bad
it's just not everyone has access to
those resources
things like eye movement desensitization
reprocessing simply moving the eyes
laterally while recounting these
negative events the woman who devised
this
figured out that somehow when people
recount these traumatic experiences when
they're doing these lateralized eye
movements not vertical eye movements
they
somehow
separate out the negative emotions and i
thought for years people would ask me
about this stuff tom and i thought this
is ridiculous first of all i'm a vision
scientist and i work on stress it's like
there's no way and then i really ate my
words because four papers two inhumans
two in mice and then a fifth paper
published in nature which is kind of our
super bowl of scientific publishing
showed that these lateralized eye
movements quiet the amygdala they
actually suppress activation of this
threat detection center in the amygdala
and why would that be true ah so this is
really where it gets cool turns out
because of
when the way that we view the visual
world when we move through space when
our head moves or when we walk and
things flow past us that these
lateralized eye movements
are what happens when you move forward
in space when you're walking when you're
moving forward towards something and
that suppresses
activation of the amygdala now you say
why well okay so then 2018
my laboratory did an experiment there
was actually a graduate student in my
laboratory where we're looking at fear
in this case we're looking at fear to
big looming objects that either trigger
freezing or running and hiding there's a
brain area that's in your brain and
migraine that mice also have that
triggers a third option not run and hide
not freeze but forward confrontation
this is the no i'm going to fight i'm
going to move forward in the face of
diversity this is the growth mindset i'm
going to lean into friction and it turns
out that this circuit is linked to the
dopamine reward pathway when we move
forward in the face of a threat and
obviously we want to do this in healthy
adaptive ways
we suppress activity of the amygdala
through physical action of moving
forward and there's a signal sent to the
areas of the brain that control dopamine
reward
those reward centers then trigger the
release of dopamine to reward forward
effort in the face of stress or threat
so when you hear about people saying
look take some physical action when
you're feeling exhausted take some
forward physical action when you're
feeling overwhelmed by this traumatic
experience now that could be in the form
of a walk in the now this therapist she
figured out with emdr because you can't
take people walking around for therapy
sessions she figured out that these
lateralized eye movements are what
trigger suppression of the amygdala and
it makes perfect sense because the
amygdala this threat detection center in
our brain it doesn't connect to the
limbs so how does it know if you're
moving forward well because the eyes are
moving you have these reflexive eye
movements that move anytime you're
moving through space
so to make this a little more succinct
it's really forward movement action
pushing yourself across that threshold
not only rewards you but it suppresses
activity of the fear centers in the
brain and these are ancient hardwired
mechanisms these aren't hacks these are
things that mother nature installed in
us
so i love this more than you could
possibly imagine uh this is
so interesting um one of the things that
i've heard talked about i think is
really powerful is that overcoming a
fear isn't about um diminishing the fear
response it's about
making more robust a sense of being
brave in the face of that fear um so
moving forward to translate it to you
know
like you say if if your brain is meant
to interpret
stimuli
what at a stimulus level what is that
thing that's going to trigger the
response
talk about the the i don't know if it
was mice or rats i think it was rats
where you force them to fight and
they're like in a tube and you like that
that study to me
tied with what you just said is insanely
powerful especially for people who've
allowed themselves to become paralyzed
by you know fear or whatever forward
movement provided it doesn't endanger
you or kill you is
absolutely the remedy for fear stress
and all and at least in the clinical
literature to these sort of trauma
events you know that that people carry
with them for many years of course
trauma needs to be dealt with hopefully
with a professional but we can all apply
these mechanisms and these neurochemical
reward schedules so the the study that
you're referring to is a beautiful one
um
there's a classic study where
researchers not my lab put two rats or
you could do this with mice into a tube
and the tendency is for them to try and
push one or the other one out one always
wins and pushes the other one out we
call the one that got pushed out the
loser the one that pushed him out the
winner
here are the interesting things about
this
first of all the winner
will tend to win
with other in other battles even though
these are just pushing battles
more because it simply won the time
before the loser by losing will tend to
lose and so people say oh well that
explains a lot about society etc well
here's where it gets really interesting
you can even take a mouse or a rat and
push it from behind and make it the
winner and then on subsequent trials
where you're not pushing it it will tend
to win more often so the win doesn't
even have to come from itself
so
last year there was a very important
paper published about this where a set
of researchers just said well
what is it like what is this winning
circuit and this losing circuit enough
with the demonstration that this happens
like what's happening on what's under
the hood and so they went into the brain
and they identified
a brain area which is part of the
frontal cortex the area that we
typically think about planning action
executive function all the kind of high
level stuff
and what they
discovered was this brain area is more
active in the winter
than in the loser in fact they could
take the loser and over stimulate this
area and turn the losers into winners
now it gets even more ridiculous than
that if you quiet this brain area
winners become losers okay
and
and if you take a winner
and let's say at this tube battle and
you put them into let's say a cold
environment with a bunch of other mice
and you have just a warm corner mice
don't like to be cold and you say who
gets the warm corner right who gets the
luxury spot it's always the winner so it
even breaks down at the level of social
interactions and so you say okay all
right now we know that's this brain area
it's this it's this one area of the
frontal cortex but what's it actually
doing right okay what's it actually tran
what how can we translate this turns out
this brain area that's responsible and
required for winning in this series of
experiments
is actually driving up the level of
activation
what you and i would call agitation or
stress to the point where that animal is
more likely to move forward it's simply
taking stress which is
wired into us in order to make us feel
agitated instead of
suppressing us you know instead of
saying you know what i'm just going to
sit here i'm overwhelmed
i'm just going to move into action so
there's a circuit for winning there's a
the same circuit when it's
hypoactive not active enough is what
causes losing in these competitive
scenarios and similarly there's a
circuit for quitting there's an a
norepinephrine circuit in the brainstem
this was published in the last couple
years showing that when animals or
people are in constant effort eventually
that level of norepinephrine gets so
high that it triggers a circuit that
shuts down the motor control over the
limbs and you just say that's it i give
up i'm done so these mechanisms were
hardwired into us we all have them
whether or not it's from evolution
mother nature god the universe it is
it's irrelevant to the discussion that
these circuits exist in everybody and i
think it's a select few people who
really understand that forward action
is what drives these circuits
it's
the ability to take that agitation
stress agitation increase our focus and
they bias us for movement and nature
wanted that they want us to move forward
in the face of challenge not to be
quiescent we weren't sitting around
battling tigers and saber-toothed tigers
all the time more likely we were in
caves and we were getting hungry and we
had to go out and search for things
agitation and stress were designed to
get us up and move us and when we try
and fight that too much and we try and
quiet that stress
that actually can be problematic you
have to decide are you going to try and
quiet stress or are you going to
actually lean into action that's
critical choice point for everybody
who's experienced anything negative or
positive for that matter
dude that that is so useful in terms of
getting people to understand how to get
themselves out of it and this goes back
to this notion that um
your
thoughts are ultimately a choice like
you get to decide what you think about
and when you understand that you're
living in this vr environment and that
there are things like simply moving
forward is going to make you feel
entirely different that you're being
essentially manipulated by evolution by
nature or however you want to think
about it to get you agitated enough to
go out and do the things you need to do
but that it has this just feedback loop
of how it makes you feel about yourself
that winning begets winning and losing
begets losing but it's it isn't like at
some sort of grand untangible level that
it's happening at the level of
neurochemistry that there are regions of
the brain that are designed for this so
how can somebody begin to turn things
around in their life because i know one
thing that people really struggle with
is they have this negative voice in
their head that's just playing this loop
and so
even if they understand the mechanisms
some part of them is going to discount
it right because it's like well you're
just trying to say that because you
think you can manipulate neurochemistry
but you you're a loser like you just
fall night and that's what's playing in
their head how do people go in and and
really take the reins of that process
so that they can start winning yeah
great question so you know i'm never
gonna argue that we can subjectively
control all of our experience because
there are some things that just
genuinely suck right and when they and
it's important to and it's important to
register those those not so great events
or terrible events because they can
drive us also you know we can be driven
from a place of anger frustration and
and you know revenge or we can be driven
from a place of you know love gratitude
and etc i'm not here to judge which one
is better or worse but the nervous
system doesn't distinguish between them
so if you're the kind of person that
needs to you know kind of budge yourself
into something great if you're the kind
of person that wants to do things from
more of a warm fuzzy feeling that's fine
too what i will say is this the ability
to tap into this dopamine reward system
which
is activated anytime you're in pursuit
of something that's outside the
boundaries of your skin and literally
the boundaries of your body as well as
the reward system the serotonin oxytocin
system which is really about the things
that are contained within your own body
and immediate experience things like
gratitude and you know
touch and comfort and things like that
with loved ones
the ability to tap into both is crucial
now you said something really important
which was well negative thoughts
negative thoughts what to do i don't
believe that it's very easy to suppress
negative thoughts
however when you realize that thoughts
can be deliberately introduced you can
start replacing negative thoughts with
new types of thoughts so you can always
add something in but when people start
to realize that thoughts are very much
like physical actions of reaching and
picking up a glass of water or taking a
jog around the ball block or typing an
email perfectly this is something i
sometimes do because i'm i you know i
struggle to do the perfect email not all
my emails are perfect but when i do one
i make sure that i i complete and i
think okay it's possible it's not
because the email being perfect is so
important it's because i want to remind
myself that my thoughts and my actions
are essentially the same the nervous
system can organize thoughts so for
somebody that's struggling
you know we have these examples like oh
they were really back on their heels or
they were so depleted no money and all
this stuff what are they gonna we we
have so many examples like that but in
trying to make it actionable it's really
about saying yep that's all true
but i'm gonna introduce a thought which
is i made it through today
i
i made it through today and that's
actually worth celebrating at a micro
level so if you can give yourself
dopamine rewards in small increments
right you're not trying to celebrate
that you made it through one day
sometimes that's a huge feat but most of
the time you just want to dose yourself
with a little bit of that internal
release of dopamine
you start rewarding incremental steps
and if there's anything that your
listeners could take away from this
whole thing about dopamine and reward
schedules and being in movement it's
reward incremental steps
in particular
incremental steps that are about forward
action so maybe that's writing an email
maybe that's um maybe that's that run
around the block maybe that's something
much grander for you as you get better
at things right the stairs get further
and further away from one another
because you've achieved more success and
so they tend to be you have to take the
rungs on the ladder further apart so to
speak that's a time when you really need
to implement not only the dopamine
rewards but also those serotonin and
oxytocin rewards etc so to make it
actionable
i would say remember don't spend so much
time trying to suppress negative
thoughts if you need trauma therapy
pursue that with a professional but if
you have negative thoughts just remember
i can also introduce
positive thoughts the same way i can
control running around the block
positive thoughts are the equivalent of
forward physical action and if you
reward them internally you buffer
yourself against the quitting circuit
this norepinephrine circuit we were
talking about before you are building a
stronger version of yourself completely
between your own ears and some people
say well that's silly it's like you're
saying oh i'm going to jump up and down
reward myself for doing nothing no
you're building the neural circuits that
reward that you can control self-reward
and in doing that you can push through
days and weeks of effort consistently i
don't mean necessarily all-nighters but
you can push and push and push you know
my career is one that was made over two
decades it wasn't we had our our big you
know peaks and we added a lot of alleys
but
learning to control these rewards is
absolutely key and i know you've done
this too tom it's like you know it the
huge wins are great but it's really
about rewarding these increments so you
can keep going another 30 another 40
years 50 years 100 years if that's how
long you know if david sinclair has his
way you know
we'll live a hundred more years all of
us so
yeah people if people learn to tie
things to the process then they've got a
real shot
[Music]
the the
success is not guaranteed but the
struggle is right so if you are able to
get to the point where you get excited
about the learning process you get
excited about trying something even if
you fail that if you can associate in
your own mind that i feel better about
who i am because i tried this thing
then it begins to stack because even the
failures become something that you learn
and so you actually have made some
progress because you took action because
you tried something and now
understanding you know some of the brain
mechanisms around it it really gets
super powerful
now
for people to um
make use of every tool that they have at
their at their disposal something that
you've talked about that i've always
been really interested in at the
periphery but never
have um dove into it enough is hypnosis
when people think of hypnosis i think
they think of stage hypnosis what's the
real deal why is it useful and and how
do people actually use it yeah so um i'm
really glad you asked about this so i
have a colleague his name is david
spiegel in our department of psychiatry
at stanford and he and i have a
collaboration going now looking at how
respiration or breathing can be used to
shift the brain into different states
and
i've talked to david about this and so
i'm sort of borrowing from his words
here so i want to be fair that these are
from those conversations
so hypnosis inevitably involves relaxing
the nervous system taking the nervous
system into states that are more like
sleep now what i mean by that is in high
alert states where you're talking and
planning and inaction and stress in
particular
the brain is very linear it's saying
okay if this then this if then then this
is why we tend to be forward thinking
when we're when we're stressed we tend
to be not in our immediate experience
but really kind of forward thinking so
clinical hypnosis involves going into a
state of deeper relaxation so that our
analysis of space and time meaning the
way that the brain is perceiving events
is slightly
dismantled so that it's a little bit
dreamlike and then the hypnotist and
this could be by listening to a script
or listening to a hypnotherapist
starts to narrow our context take our
thoughts if you will it down a
particular path and that path could be
one of um stress reduction or
a smoking cessation um hypnosis is
incidentally is very good for treatment
of smoking cessation or
for feelings of well-being or
confronting traumas so what it is is
it's really opening up the window for
neural plasticity which is of course the
brain's ability to change in response to
experience to trigger neuroplasticity
you have to have focus especially as an
adult you need acetylcholine released
but
high levels of attention acetylcholine
and norepinephrine together
norepinephrine to create that sense of
urgency and acetylcholine to bring that
spotlight of focus in really really
tight that triggers plasticity but the
actual it marks certain synapses in the
brain for change but the actual changes
in the synapses the rewiring okay that
happens during states of sleep and deep
rest
so this is why when you're trying to
learn a motor skill you go and you go in
your tennis serve it's not happening
it's not happening you take a break you
come back and you nail it you're like
wait what happened well you needed time
to set those circuits in motion and
allow them to do to the rewiring the
sort of adaptation hypnosis seems to
capture both the high attentional state
and the deep relaxation at the same time
it's this very unusual state of mind
where you're neither asleep nor awake
and in tight focus or narrow focus
and it's very clear that it leads to
these rapid changes in behavior because
you're rewiring the brain and the reason
you're able to rewire the brain so
quickly is because you're getting the
trigger event the focus
and you're also getting the relaxation
event simultaneously and so it's much
faster than separating out the learning
trigger from the actual rewiring of the
brain
my lab has a deep interest and david
spiegel's lab has a deep interest now in
using respiration or breathing to shift
our state to either heightened states of
focus and alertness to open up
neuroplasticity right there are going to
be lots of ways to access can you give
me some examples like what are we doing
very specifically breath work i find
incredibly interesting i changed my life
through meditation just shifting my
breathing to diaphragmatic breathing was
no joke
it changed my life it changed my
relationship to anxiety my feeling of
being able to control my state as it
started to spiral um
so i'd be very curious to know what type
of breathing are we talking about here
yeah so i'm really glad you mentioned
the diaphragm diaphragm of course being
this muscle inside of all of us at least
all mammals that works all the time to
move our lungs because all the cells our
body need oxygen of course we gotta get
rid of carbon dioxide it does that but
it's done reflexively but we can also
take voluntary control over it i want to
just mention about the diaphragm why
it's so important for what were these
state changes is that a lot of people
talk about the vagus nerve and all this
stuff the vagus and these connections
between the brain and this vagus nerve
or the gut
it's what gets activated when you're
really full and you eat a big meal and
you feel relaxed those are great but
it's very slow
the diaphragm is skeletal muscle just
like your bicep just like your tricep
just like your quadricep it is the only
internal organ except maybe a couple
muscles in your throat that are actually
skeletal muscle meaning it was designed
to be voluntarily moved and the
diaphragm isn't just designed to move
your lungs it also sends a signal
through the so-called phrenic nerve back
to the brain to inform your brain about
the status of your body so when you
breathe fast deliberately the reason you
feel kind of an elevated sense of
alertness is because the other chemicals
secrete but mostly because the phrenic
nerve is firing off it's telling you hey
the body's moving we're really running
now even though you're stationary in a
chair if you're doing breathing or if
you're breathing very slowly and
rhythmically right box type breathing or
you know slow slow breathing
your diaphragm is telling your brain hey
we're calm we're good and you calm down
very quickly on the order of seconds and
so once you start tapping into this you
start realizing okay movement of the
body was designed to inform the brain of
where to be not just the brain telling
the body and how does the body
communicate with the brain through the
phrenic nerve from the diaphragm so my
lab is really pursuing two questions and
this is still being worked out so i just
want to highlight that it's still in
progress
but
certain patterns of breathing will calm
you very much like entering a hypnotic
state and so you have a subset of
neurons in your brain stem that are
responsible for sighing is it you have a
subset of neurons in your brainstem
responsible for for coughing subset of
neurons responsible for laughter and a
subset of neurons in your brain stem for
sign this was a paper published in
nature this is a real thing these
neurons are every so often and your dog
does this too
you inhale twice
and then you exhale long
now that double inhale
best done through the nose on the
inhales and then long exhale through the
mouth
activates these side neurons that
trigger the so-called calming reflex the
parasympathetic arm of the nervous
system so we have a hard-wired mechanism
a set of neurons connection in the
diaphragm and back again from the
diaphragm to the brain that was designed
to activate calm
and when people ask me how should i
breathe to calm myself down i always say
double inhale through the nose followed
by exhales two or three of those will
reset your autonomic nervous system
faster than any other mechanism we're
aware of
because it's really capitalizing on a
set of neural circuits now once you're
calm you say well how do i get into
plasticity states there you want to go
the other direction
that's going to be inhaling a lot more
than you exhale you're going to be
driving in more oxygen than you are
breathing out
generally carbon dioxide and that will
lead to states that are kind of more
elevated this is typical of things like
tumor breathing wim hof breathing
kundalini breathing and when people
enter those states
their whole world changes because it
shuts off the frontal cortex it really
this is why sometimes people pass out or
they feel like they want to get up and
move you know you get some odd behavior
when you're doing this kind of thing
so the key is if you want to access
states of heightened plasticity let's
say you want to learn faster where you
want to be more um
you want to bring more out of some
physical training that you're doing the
key is to apply those principles first
you need to focus you need to bring
yourself to that heightened state of
alertness you can breathe to do that so
this would be super oxygenated breathing
then you want to drop into a state of
calm and you do that by these a couple
maybe two or three rounds of inhale
inhale exhale inhale inhale exhale and
then now your brain is in a state we
believe this is still again being worked
out in labs like mine and david's that
then you're in a state for heightened
learning
because you're in a state where
neurochemicals like acetylcholine are
going to be at levels that are higher
than they typically would be things like
noradrenaline slightly higher than they
typically would be but not in a
discombobulated way in a very regulated
way and the cool thing is you're
regulating them so you could argue you
know earlier we were talking about
subjective emotions and thoughts and all
these things but one thing that's
absolutely concrete is breathing i
always think of physical exercise
movement writing
whatever singing dancing talking those
are physical actions in the universe
then you have thought and somewhere in
between those is controlling your
respiration once you can control
everything that's within the confines of
your skull and skin once you can really
control that relationship that brain
body relationship you start to realize
that relationship is a lot like any
other relationship to forward action
it's just all happening within the
confines of my body so it's heightened
states of focus followed by states of
relaxation that are going to prime your
nervous system for learning and
plasticity just like hypnosis
sorry for the long-winded discussion
do
don't you dare apologize that is some of
the most powerful and useful information
literally ever i can't
i can't tell you how much i love what
you're studying what you're talking
about this was so incredible dude
thank you so much where can people
engage with you where can they learn
more i think this is so important and so
powerful i want people to uh really
connect with you oh well thanks so much
um so i teach instagram in little short
bits and sometimes in longer bits on
instagram and that's huberman lab
h-u-b-e-r-m-a-n-l-a-b
so that's where i teach neuroscience and
offer up things about plasticity and
sleep and also some tools and we talk
about things like autism and etc lots of
things anytime i see a paper it's
interesting i try and discuss it um my
lab is hubermanlab.com there we put our
papers and our research that we publish
and we are always recruiting subjects
for experiments um where we pay you to
participate in these different kinds of
things we're launching a big respiration
breath work study soon so um if you
reach out by instagram or i'll probably
announce it there as well be wonderful
we we're looking to recruit people we're
teaming up with some tech companies it
will arm people with some really
terrific at-home tech so we can get
their data and really get a clear sense
of how these tools and practices
aren't just landing subjectively but
really what's happening at a concrete
level even things like cortisol measures
and stuff so if you're interested you
could reach out through either venue the
hubermann lab or the instagram hebrew in
lab
and i generally try and respond to
everybody's requests sometimes i'm a
little slow but i really aim
to do that as much as possible
nice man
i love it dude so uh last question if
you were going to have people make one
change that would have the biggest
impact on their health what change would
you have them make
well that is a great question i think
the fundamental
step that everybody should be taking
every day for
many aspects of their health mental
physical digestive immune all of that is
to get two to ten minutes of bright
light first thing in the morning on
waking
ideally it's sunlight
you could do it through a window
if you wear you probably shouldn't wear
sunglasses while you do it don't stare
at the sun until you burn your retinas
out or something and make it painful
please don't do that but just getting
bright light exposure first thing in the
morning organizes
the nervous system and the rest of the
organs of the body in such a powerful
way that i feel like if you do that most
days if you miss a day no big deal but
if you do that most days you're setting
yourself on the path to do all the other
sorts of things correctly and
your biology
will thank you for it love that
dude this was amazing thank you so much
i definitely win the quarantine has
lifted we've got to get together in the
same room i think that would be so much
fun i could easily go on for another
hour or two or three hours talking about
this with you so uh you have an open
invitation to come back in the very near
future so
thank you so much definitely thank you
absolutely man thank you for coming on
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you